# RESEARCH REPORT:  
## Licence Type Recommendation for Datasets

### Introduction  
Purpose: To recommend a suitable non-commercial licence type for dataset artefacts produced by Data team given the nature of AAIE project requirements. 

Motivation: The datasets could be distributed outside of AAIE project. A proper licence type ensures that proper credits are attributed, and the usage conditions are honoured. 

---

### I. Project Requirements 
The current requirements for AAIE project are:
-	Non-commercial use
-	Enforce copyright to retain intellectual property for Deakin University
-	Allow as-is use (with APIs and interim front-end)
-	Delivery as a downloadable or cloud-hosted service (for AI tools and models)

In addition, there are two possible approaches for dataset creation: 

***Approach 1: Pure synthesized datasets***

The datasets are entirely generated by Data team using GenAI without incorporating any external data. This is the approach for Trimester 2, 2025.

***Approach 2: Synthesized datasets with External Public Data Augmentation***

The datasets are generated by Data team using GenAI but incorporating external public datasets to enhance the generalisation of the datasets.

### II. Licensing Approach  
With the specified requirements, the core principle for choosing the license type is “strong copyleft”. This will ensure that the license terms will be spread down to any derivative works, ensuring that the non-commercial educational nature of the project and its intellectual property are protected.

Using the “strong copyleft” principle, the recommendation for the project licence type are described in the recommendation section.

### III. Recommendations  
**Approach 1 Datasets:**
Since the Data team generates all the contents of the datasets, the project exerts total control of licence terms for the Datasets. Using the guiding principle, the best choice is a license that clearly states non-commercial use and mandates share-alike.

Thus, Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) is the most appropriate for the dataset because it provides the following benefits:
-	Non-commercial usages are explicitly prevented
-	Subsequent modifications or builds upon the original works must be released under the same licence.
-	The gold standard for non-commercial licence type, widely used and understood internationally for licensing data and creative contents.

Link to full terms: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/ 

**Approach 2 Datasets:**
Due to the legal dependency, the licence choice will need to be compatible with the external dataset licence and consent agreements.

Below table lists the licence types of candidate external dataset licence types as of T2-2025 Trimester:

| Dataset Name | Licence Type |
|--------------------|-------------------|
| DREsS | CC BY 4.0 |
| ASAP 2.0 | CC BY-NC 4.0 |
| RE3 | CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 |
| Iterator | CC BY-NC 4.0 |

As CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 is compatible with all the listed licence types, it is also the appropriate choice for this second approach. 

### IV. Licence Implementation  
The licence type should be included in a LICENSE.md file in Github repository datasets folder. The LICENSE.md file should clearly state the license type. Below is an example of licence notice:
“The datasets in this directory are licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) license”

The dataset licence type should be documented in other project documentations where appropriate and/or in communication with different stakeholders.

### V. Impacts on other Pillars:
**Model Team:**
Models can be licensed under the same licence as Datasets, i.e. CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. In this case, the model itself cannot be used for commercial purposes, and any new models fine-tuned from the built models must also be non-commercial and share-alike. LLM team may want to add other ethical requirements and restrictions, such as “The use of this model is subject to the following Responsible AI Use Restrictions..."

**Product Engineering Team:**
For application codes, the GPL is a popular and meet the copyleft principle as it enforces the same GPL licence terms to derived works. CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 can also be used if the code base is not extensive. 

---

### Appendix: Common Licence Types for Datasets  
#### 1. Creative Commons (CC):
Description: Popular licence type for open data.
Link: https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/ 

Main variants: 
- Creative Commons Zero (CC0): For release of datasets to public domain without any restrictions or attributes to original creators and/or owners. 
- Creative Common Attribution (CC BY): For release of datasets to public domain with the requirement of attribution to the original creator and without additional restrictions. 
- Creative Common Attribution-ShareAlike (CC BY-SA): Same as CC BY but requires the derivatives be shared under the same license.
- Creative Common Attribution -NonCommercial (CC BY-NC): Same as CC BY but restrict to non-commercial usages.
- Creative Common Attribution-NoDerivatives (CC BY-ND): Same as CC BY but no derivatives allowed.

The ShareAlike, NonCommercial and NoDerivatives are often mixed and used together to provide the desired licensing terms for different use-cases.

#### 2. MIT Licence (MIT):
Description: A permissive open-source software license, granting users the right to use, copy, modify and distribute the works, including in commercial settings, if original notice and licence text are included. The licence does not require that derived works be licensed under the same terms. It is more commonly used for codes than datasets.

Main use-case: For release of datasets that will be adopted or derived freely with only copyright acknowledgement. 

Link: https://opensource.org/license/mit 

#### 3.	GNU General Public License (GPL)
Description: A widely used free software licence, granting the users the right to use, copy, modify and distribute the works but the derivatives must be licensed under the GPL. It is more popular for codes and software than datasets.

Main use-case: For release of datasets that will be adopted or derived freely with copyright acknowledgement and same licensing terms on future works (copyleft).

Link: https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html 

#### 4.	Apache License 2.0
Description: A permissive open-source license from the Apache Software Foundation, granting users to freely use, modify, and distribute the works including for commercial purposes and patent rights if appropriately attributed to the original work licence. It does not restrict the licence terms of derivative works and only requires the modified files to include a prominent change notice.

Main use-case: Similar to GPL without copyleft enforcement.

Link: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
#### 5.	Proprietary or Custom Licenses: 
It is possible to release datasets under proprietary or custom licence written by the University.

*Note:* Custom licence is beyond the scope of the Data team.

---